docs: gatsby for apps - data fetching (#19786)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/docs/data-fetching.md

This combination of static/dynamic is possible through React [hydration](/docs/glossary#hydration), which means that Gatsby (through React.js) builds static files to render server-side. When Gatsby's script bundle downloads and executes in the browser, it preserves the HTML markup built by Gatsby and turns the site into a full React web application that can manipulate the [DOM](/docs/glossary#dom). The result of this process creates fast loading pages and a nice user experience.

> To understand how statically generated content can turn into a React app, refer to the [Understanding React Hydration guide](/docs/react-hydration)

Compiling pages at build time is useful when your website content won't change often, or when triggering a build process to recompile works fine. However, some websites with more dynamic needs require a [client-side](/docs/glossary#client-side) runtime to handle constantly changing content after the page loads, like a chat widget, user upvotes, or an email client web application.

## Combining build time and client runtime data

> To illustrate this combination of build time and runtime data, this guide uses code from a [small example site](https://gatsby-data-fetching.netlify.com). It uses the [`gatsby-source-graphql`](/packages/gatsby-source-graphql/) plugin to fetch data from the GitHub API at build time for static content like the name and url to a repository, and the [`fetch` API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API) to retrieve more dynamic data from the GitHub API on the [client-side](/docs/glossary#client-side) like star counts when the page loads in the browser.

Reviewer: See note below about simplicity and assumptions re: GraphQL servers.
```suggestion
To illustrate a combination of build time and client runtime data, this guide uses code from a [small example site](https://gatsby-data-fetching.netlify.com). It uses the [`gatsby-source-graphql`](/packages/gatsby-source-graphql/) plugin to fetch data from GitHub's GraphQL API at build time for static content like the name and url to a repository, and the [`fetch` API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API) to retrieve more dynamic data from the GitHub API on the [client-side](/docs/glossary#client-side) like star counts when the page loads in the browser.
```

> Check out the code from the [full example here](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/tree/master/examples/data-fetching).

### Fetching data at build time

> For fetching data at build time, you can create an integration with a third-party system by sourcing data in your `gatsby-node` file and creating nodes for the GraphQL layer that become queryable in pages. This is the same method that source plugins implement to [source data](/docs/content-and-data/) while the site builds. You can read about that process in the [Creating a Source Plugin guide](/docs/creating-a-source-plugin/).

Reviewer: > integration with a third-party system by _sourcing data_ in your `gatsby-node` file

Is there a more specific phrase we can use than "sourcing data" since it's repeated in the next sentence under slightly different circumstances/motivations (a source plugin vs. fetching data as a one-off)?

> This process of fetching data at build time and creating pages from the data is [covered in more depth in the tutorial](/tutorial/part-five/) as well as the docs for [creatiing pages from data programmatically](/docs/programmatically-create-pages-from-data/).

#### Source data to be queried at build time

> The simplest way to source data is to take advantage of an existing source plugin. To install the `gatsby-source-graphql`:

Reviewer: This is only simple if a) the user understands the process and b) if the API they want to hit has a GraphQL server. The latter seems like a caveat we should mention, and provide suggestions of alternatives if they want to retrieve data from somewhere at build time that isn't a GraphQL API endpoint.

Author: Very good point! Definitely an assumption, I'll reword this and provide other options.

```shell
npm install --save gatsby-source-graphql
```

Then, add the plugin to your `gatsby-config`:

```javascript:title=gatsby-config.js
module.exports = {
  plugins: [
    {
      resolve: `gatsby-source-graphql`,
      options: {
        typeName: `GitHub`,
        fieldName: `github`,

>         url: `https://api.github.com/graphql`,

Reviewer: Perhaps we could highlight this to point out it's a graphql API?
```suggestion
        url: `https://api.github.com/graphql`, //highlight-line
```

        headers: {
          Authorization: `Bearer your-github-token`,
        },
      },
    },
  ],
}
```

> Because the GitHub GraphQL API requires you to be authenticated to make requests, you need to create a token that you would replace in the header for Authorization that says "your-github-token". You can [secure your key using environment variables](/docs/environment-variables/) if you're pushing code to a public repository.

Source plugins take advantage of the [`sourceNodes` API](/docs/node-apis/#sourceNodes) and the [`createNode` action](/docs/actions/#createNode) provided by Gatsby to make your data queryable during the build process.

#### Writing a query to gather the static data needed for a page

> With the source plugin installed and added to your config, you can write a [static query](/docs/use-static-query/) that will pull the data from GraphQL API and will retrieve the necessary data while building the site.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the source plugin installed and added to your config, you can write a [static query](/docs/use-static-query/) that will retrieve the necessary data from Gatsby's data layer while building the site.
```
Is the data already sourced by the time the static query is set up?

```jsx:title=src/pages/index.js
import React from "react"
import { graphql, useStaticQuery } from "gatsby" // highlight-line

const IndexPage = () => {
  // highlight-start
  const gatsbyRepoData = useStaticQuery(graphql`
    query {
      github {
        repository(name: "gatsby", owner: "gatsbyjs") {
          id
          nameWithOwner
          url
        }
      }
    }
  `)
  // highlight-end

  return (
    <section>
      <p>
        Build Time Data: Gatsby repo{` `}

>         <a href="gatsbyRepoData.github.repository.nameWithOwner.url">

Reviewer: This should be an object rather than a string, yeah?
```suggestion
        <a href={gatsbyRepoData.github.repository.nameWithOwner.url}>
```

          {gatsbyRepoData.github.repository.nameWithOwner} // highlight-line
        </a>
      </p>
    </section>
  )
}

export default IndexPage
```

> 

Reviewer: Perhaps there should be a build-time example rendered on page to be consistent with the client-side example?

> ### Fetching data at runtime

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Fetching data at client-side runtime
```

For fetching data at runtime, you can use any method to retrieve data that you would use in a regular React app.

#### Retrieving data with the `fetch` API

> The `fetch` API is a modern implementation of the older, well-supported `XMLHttpRequest`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `fetch` API is a modern implementation of the older, well-supported `XMLHttpRequest` (also known as AJAX).
```

With the `useState` and `useEffect` hooks from React, you can query for the data once when the page loads, and save the data returned to a variable called `starsCount`. Every time the page is refreshed, `fetch` will go to the GitHub API to retrieve the most up-to-date version of the data.

```jsx:title=src/pages/index.js
import React, { useState, useEffect } from "react" // highlight-line
import { graphql, useStaticQuery } from "gatsby"

const IndexPage = () => {

>   const gatsbyRepoData = useStaticQuery(graphql`

Reviewer: The build time and runtime data usage here is a little confusing to detangle, especially since the `ClientDataExample` example that follows only includes runtime data after seeing the `useStaticQuery` hook here. Is there a way to isolate these API calls into different examples or label/explain them so it's more clear what's rendered when and why?

Author: I added a build time example and reworded it to call the example on page an "adaption". I also added comments to the second section (with build and runtime) to label which is which and added a lengthier explanation below the code to try and explain what was happening. Think that is enough to unpack it or do you have other suggestions?

Reviewer: Seems sufficient to me!

    query {
      github {
        repository(name: "gatsby", owner: "gatsbyjs") {
          id
          nameWithOwner
          url
        }
      }
    }
  `)
  // highlight-start
  const [starsCount, setStarsCount] = useState(0)
  useEffect(() => {
    const fetchData = async () => {
      // get data from GitHub api
      const result = await fetch(`https://api.github.com/repos/gatsbyjs/gatsby`)
      // parse JSON from request
      const resultData = await result.json()
      // set data for the number of stars
      setStarsCount(resultData.stargazers_count)
    }
    fetchData()
  }, [])
  // highlight-end

  return (
    <section>
      <p>

>         Build Time Data: Gatsby repo{` `}

Reviewer: What is the ``{`  `}`` for here, out of curiosity?

Author: When prettier wraps the text for readability (or whatever reason they wrap text) it pushes new HTML elements like `<a>` down a line and will put text inside an anchor next to the text inside the `<p>` tag. Adding `{` `}` adds a space, sometimes prettier even automatically adds it.

>         <a href="gatsbyRepoData.github.repository.nameWithOwner.url">

Reviewer: Same as above re: an object vs. a string
```suggestion
        <a href={gatsbyRepoData.github.repository.nameWithOwner.url}>
```

---
title: Build Time and Client Runtime Data Fetching
---

import BuildDataExample from "../../www/src/components/build-data-example.js"
import ClientDataExample from "../../www/src/components/client-data-example.js"

> This guide demonstrates how to fetch data at both [_build time_](/docs/glossary#build) and [_runtime_](/docs/glossary#runtime) in Gatsby.

Reviewer: What do you think about adding this kind of intro statement to set expectations, so that people don't go down a rabbit-hole before realizing there's already a plugin for their use case?
```suggestion
This guide demonstrates how to fetch data at both [_build time_](/docs/glossary#build) and [_runtime_](/docs/glossary#runtime) in Gatsby. Most of the techniques outlined are for custom data handling. Be sure to check out Gatsby's [plugin library](/plugins/) to see if there's an off-the-shelf solution for your data requirements, such as [sourcing from a CMS](/docs/headless-cms/) or other third-party integration.
```

This combination of static/dynamic is possible through React [hydration](/docs/glossary#hydration), which means that Gatsby (through React.js) builds static files to render server-side. When Gatsby's script bundle downloads and executes in the browser, it preserves the HTML markup built by Gatsby and turns the site into a full React web application that can manipulate the [DOM](/docs/glossary#dom). The result of this process creates fast loading pages and a nice user experience.

> To understand how statically generated content can turn into a React app, refer to the [Understanding React Hydration guide](/docs/react-hydration)

Compiling pages at build time is useful when your website content won't change often, or when triggering a build process to recompile works fine. However, some websites with more dynamic needs require a [client-side](/docs/glossary#client-side) runtime to handle constantly changing content after the page loads, like a chat widget, user upvotes, or an email client web application.

## Combining build time and client runtime data

> To illustrate a combination of build time and client runtime data, this guide uses code from a [small example site](https://gatsby-data-fetching.netlify.com). It uses the [`gatsby-source-graphql`](/packages/gatsby-source-graphql/) plugin to fetch data from GitHub's GraphQL API at build time for static content like the name and url to a repository, and the [`fetch` API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API) to retrieve more dynamic data from the GitHub API on the [client-side](/docs/glossary#client-side) like star counts when the page loads in the browser.

Reviewer: Capitalizing URL for readability
```suggestion
To illustrate a combination of build time and client runtime data, this guide uses code from a [small example site](https://gatsby-data-fetching.netlify.com). It uses the [`gatsby-source-graphql`](/packages/gatsby-source-graphql/) plugin to fetch data from GitHub's GraphQL API at build time for static content like the name and URL to a repository, and the [`fetch` API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API) to retrieve more dynamic data from the GitHub API on the [client-side](/docs/glossary#client-side) like star counts when the page loads in the browser.
```

> 

Reviewer: What do you think about adding something like this to help explain build time vs. client time data a little more?
```suggestion
Reasons to fetch certain data at build time vs. client runtime will vary, but in this example the repo's name and URL are much less likely to change between builds of the site. The repo's star counts, on the other hand, are likely to change often and would benefit from a client-side request to the GitHub API to stay current between static site builds.
```

> Check out the code from the [full example here](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/tree/master/examples/data-fetching).

### Fetching data at build time

> In order to fetch data at build time, you can use a source plugin or source data yourself. To source data yourself you can create an integration with a third-party system by creating nodes for the GraphQL layer in your `gatsby-node` file from retrieved data that becomes queryable in pages. This is the same method that source plugins implement to [source data](/docs/content-and-data/) while the site builds. You can read about that process in the [Creating a Source Plugin guide](/docs/creating-a-source-plugin/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to fetch data at build time, you can use a source plugin or source data yourself. To source data yourself you can create an integration with a third-party system by creating [nodes for the GraphQL layer](/docs/node-creation/) in your `gatsby-node` file from retrieved data that becomes queryable in pages. This is the same method that source plugins implement to [source data](/docs/content-and-data/) while the site builds. You can read about that process in the [Creating a Source Plugin guide](/docs/creating-a-source-plugin/).
```

> This process of fetching data at build time and creating pages from the data is [covered in more depth in the tutorial](/tutorial/part-five/) as well as the docs for [creatiing pages from data programmatically](/docs/programmatically-create-pages-from-data/).

#### Source data to be queried at build time

> To source data using an existing source plugin you need to install a plugin and add it to your config. To use `gatsby-source-graphql`, first install it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To source data using an existing source plugin you need to install a plugin and add it to your [config](/docs/api-files-gatsby-config/). To use `gatsby-source-graphql`, first install it:
```

```shell
npm install --save gatsby-source-graphql
```

Then, add the plugin to your `gatsby-config`:

```javascript:title=gatsby-config.js
module.exports = {
  plugins: [
    {
      resolve: `gatsby-source-graphql`,
      options: {
        typeName: `GitHub`,
        fieldName: `github`,
        url: `https://api.github.com/graphql`, //highlight-line
        headers: {
          Authorization: `Bearer your-github-token`,
        },
      },
    },
  ],
}
```

> > Because the GitHub GraphQL API requires you to be authenticated to make requests, you need to create a token that you would replace in the header for Authorization that says "your-github-token". You can [secure your key using environment variables](/docs/environment-variables/) if you're pushing code to a public repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Because the GitHub GraphQL API requires you to be authenticated to make requests, you need to create a token and replace the "your-github-token" text in the header for Authorization with that token. You can [secure your key using environment variables](/docs/environment-variables/) if you're pushing code to a public repository.
```
This read a little confusingly, so I adjusted it.

      type: `Example`,
      contentDigest: createContentDigest(resultData),
    },
  })
}
```

This node created manually could be retrieved with a query like this:

```graphql
query {
  example {
    nameWithOwner
    url
  }
}
```

#### Writing a query to gather the static data needed for a page

With the source plugin installed and added to your config, you can write a [static query](/docs/use-static-query/) that will retrieve the necessary data from Gatsby's data layer while building the site.

```jsx:title=src/pages/index.js
import React from "react"
import { graphql, useStaticQuery } from "gatsby" // highlight-line

const IndexPage = () => {
  // highlight-start
  const gatsbyRepoData = useStaticQuery(graphql`
    query {
      github {
        repository(name: "gatsby", owner: "gatsbyjs") {
          id
          nameWithOwner
          url
        }
      }
    }
  `)
  // highlight-end

  return (
    <section>
      <p>
        Build Time Data: Gatsby repo{` `}
        <a href={gatsbyRepoData.github.repository.url}>
          {gatsbyRepoData.github.repository.nameWithOwner} // highlight-line
        </a>
      </p>
    </section>
  )
}

export default IndexPage
```

> > This data is gathered at build time and written to a JSON file, the code is rewritten as the site is built to import the JSON file and set `gatsbyRepoData` equal to the contents of the JSON file instead of the call to `useStaticQuery`, you can read more about this process in the Gatsby internals section on [Normal vs Static Queries](/docs/static-vs-normal-queries/#replacing-queries-with-json-imports)

Reviewer: This was a pretty long run-on sentence, so I broke it up.
```suggestion
> This data is gathered at build time and written to a JSON file. As the build continues, the code is rewritten behind the scenes to dynamically import the JSON file and set `gatsbyRepoData` equal to the contents of the JSON file instead of the call to `useStaticQuery`. You can read more about this process in the Gatsby internals section on [Normal vs Static Queries](/docs/static-vs-normal-queries/#replacing-queries-with-json-imports)
```

Here's an adaptation of this build time data example being used on this page:

<BuildDataExample />

> > the linked url and repository name are fetched at build time, if the name of the repository changed and the site were rebuilt it would change

Reviewer: A paragraph might add a little more separation from the example as compared to the blockquote.
```suggestion
The linked URL and repository name are fetched at build time; if the name of the repository changed and the site were rebuilt, it would update.
```

### Fetching data at client-side runtime

> For fetching data at runtime, you can use any method to retrieve data that you would use in a regular React app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For fetching data at runtime in the browser, you can use any method to retrieve data that you would use in a regular React app.
```

#### Retrieving data with the `fetch` API

The `fetch` API is a modern implementation of the older, well-supported `XMLHttpRequest` (also known as AJAX).

With the `useState` and `useEffect` hooks from React, you can query for the data once when the page loads, and save the data returned to a variable called `starsCount`. Every time the page is refreshed, `fetch` will go to the GitHub API to retrieve the most up-to-date version of the data.

```jsx:title=src/pages/index.js
import React, { useState, useEffect } from "react" // highlight-line
import { graphql, useStaticQuery } from "gatsby"

const IndexPage = () => {
  // Build Time Data Fetching
  const gatsbyRepoData = useStaticQuery(graphql`
    query {
      github {
        repository(name: "gatsby", owner: "gatsbyjs") {
          id
          nameWithOwner
          url
        }
      }
    }
  `)
  // Client-side Runtime Data Fetching
  // highlight-start
  const [starsCount, setStarsCount] = useState(0)
  useEffect(() => {

>     const fetchData = async () => {

Reviewer 2: I'm unsure about this syntax, as I don't think many developers new to react will understand why you need to create a sub-function for this. It's not explained in the reactjs.org docs either so I feel like we should add a comment or convert it to a promise chain like so:

```js
fetch(`https://api.github.com/repos/gatsbyjs/gatsby`)
  .then(response => respone.json())
  .then(resultData => { setStarsCount(resultData.stargazers_count) })
```

Author: I don't see any problem with that, true that it would be easier to grasp than having to have the React understanding beforehand. I'll update it 🙂

      // get data from GitHub api
      const result = await fetch(`https://api.github.com/repos/gatsbyjs/gatsby`)
      // parse JSON from request
      const resultData = await result.json()
      // set data for the number of stars
      setStarsCount(resultData.stargazers_count)
    }
    fetchData()
  }, [])
  // highlight-end

  return (
    <section>
      <p>
        Build Time Data: Gatsby repo{` `}
        <a href={gatsbyRepoData.github.repository.url}>
          {gatsbyRepoData.github.repository.nameWithOwner}
        </a>
      </p>
      <p>Runtime Data: Star count for the Gatsby repo {starsCount}</p> // highlight-line
    </section>
  )
}

export default IndexPage
```

> In the code above, both the build time and runtime data are rendered on the same page. The build time data has the advantage of being loaded before the user ever gets to the page. When the site loads in the browser the runtime section in the `useEffect` hook will gather its data and render it as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the code above, both the build time and runtime data are rendered from the same page component. The build time data has the advantage of being loaded before the user ever gets to the page. When the site loads in the browser, the runtime section in the `useEffect` hook will gather its data and render it as well.
```

Here's an adaptation of this runtime example being used on this page (which is also a Gatsby app)!

<ClientDataExample />

> > the star count is fetched at runtime, if you refresh the page this number will update

Reviewer: #humbleBrag 😎
```suggestion
The repo's star count is fetched at runtime; if you refresh the page, this number will likely update.
```

## Other resources

> You may be interested to check out other projects (both used in production and proof of concepts) that illustrate this usage:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may be interested in other projects (both used in production and proof-of-concepts) that illustrate this usage:
```
